IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT BOMBAY

WRIT PETITION NO. 7890/2024

DATED: 5th January 2024

BETWEEN:

Dr. Meena Patil and Others
...
Petitioners

AND

Municipal Corporation of Greater Mumbai and Others
...
Respondents

CORAM: HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE VIKRAM DESAI

ORDER

1. The petitioners, who are residents of Dharavi, have filed this petition seeking directions for improvement of sanitation infrastructure and healthcare facilities in their area.

2. The Municipal Corporation of Greater Mumbai (MCGM) is hereby directed to submit a comprehensive sanitation improvement plan for Dharavi within 60 days from the date of this order.

3. The MCGM may consider engaging NGOs and community organizations in the planning process, as appropriate steps towards inclusive urban development.

4. The Additional Municipal Commissioner is hereby ordered to personally inspect the existing sanitation facilities in Dharavi within 21 days and submit a report to this Court.

5. If the inspection reveals that the existing facilities are below the minimum standards prescribed under the Maharashtra Municipal Corporations Act, the MCGM shall take immediate remedial action.

6. The State Government is expected to ensure that adequate funds are made available to the MCGM for this purpose, and it would be appropriate for the Finance Department to examine the budget allocation as may be necessary.

7. The Chief Medical Officer of Health, MCGM, is hereby directed to conduct a health survey of the area within 45 days and submit an action taken report to this Court.

8. In the event that the health survey reveals any outbreak of communicable diseases, the MCGM shall forthwith notify the State Health Department and take appropriate containment measures.

9. The respondents shall file a joint compliance affidavit within 90 days from the date of this order.

10. The matter is posted for compliance hearing on 5th April 2024.

11. It would be needful for the MCGM to also consider whether the existing water supply infrastructure in Dharavi needs upgradation, and deems fit to take appropriate steps in that regard.

12. The petitioners are at liberty to approach this Court if the directions are not complied with within the stipulated time.

IN THE RESULT, the writ petition is allowed with the above directions.

Sd/-
JUSTICE VIKRAM DESAI
