IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 456/2024

DATED: 20th February 2024

BETWEEN:

Citizens Forum for Clean Environment
...
Petitioner

AND

Union of India & Others
...
Respondents

CORAM: HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE ANIL SHARMA AND HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE PRIYA MEHTA

JUDGMENT

1. This petition raises important questions about the implementation of environmental protection measures in industrial zones.

2. The petitioner has placed on record several reports indicating that the State Pollution Control Board has not been conducting regular inspections of industrial units in the affected areas.

3. We have carefully considered the submissions made by learned counsel for all parties.

4. The State Pollution Control Board may consider taking appropriate steps to increase the frequency of inspections in industrial zones, particularly in areas where air quality index has been consistently above permissible limits.

5. It would be appropriate for the Ministry of Environment to examine whether the existing guidelines on industrial emissions need to be revised in light of the data presented before this Court.

6. The concerned District Collectors, in the event of receiving complaints from residents about industrial pollution, should ensure that appropriate action is taken within a reasonable time.

7. We are of the view that it would be needful for the State Government to constitute a monitoring committee comprising representatives from the Pollution Control Board, local administration, and civil society to periodically review the situation.

8. The Union of India may consider whether additional funding as may be necessary should be allocated to the State Pollution Control Boards for upgrading their testing equipment.

9. If the situation does not improve within six months, it shall be open to the petitioner to approach this Court again with fresh data.

10. The State Government is expected to take cognizance of the findings in the expert committee report filed as Annexure P-7 and take remedial steps as may be necessary.

11. We also observe that the local municipal bodies should satisfy themselves that the effluent treatment plants in their jurisdictions are functioning properly.

12. Subject to the above observations, the petition is disposed of. Liberty is hereby granted to the petitioner to revive the petition if the situation warrants.

Sd/-
JUSTICE ANIL SHARMA

Sd/-
JUSTICE PRIYA MEHTA
